Wednesday the 27th. Wednesday the 27th.
Wednesday the 27th.
Today, chatting still with Dr. Dean Gage, and
today we have him ready to begin service again as a
faculty member at Texas A&M. You returned from the
University of Tennessee what year? I returned in
August of 1982. And joined the Department of?
Well, actually, I became associate dean for
academic and clinical programs. That's right.
And I did have a tenured faculty position in the
Department of Small Animal Medicine and Surgery.
My responsibilities were totally
administrative. And describe, as you understood
them when you arrived, describe what your
responsibilities were to be. Well, I assure you
they became somewhat different than when I
arrived because so many different things needed a
lot of change and upgrading put into it. And the
title really signified a few major areas of
responsibility. One was for the entire
Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital, and the
second was all of the academic programs within the
College of Veterinary Medicine. And there were
some real opportunities and real challenges, one
of which was to completely reorganize the
Veterinary Teaching Hospital put it into the
context of truly being a veterinary medical
teaching hospital with all of the departments
both clinical and basic science participating
and to structure a hospital board that would
reflect the different services and academic and
research programs that would need to be a part of
that kind of operation. The second major
responsibility was clearly in the academic arena
of all of the student affairs, the academic
program, the curriculum. And at that point in
time, we were in the process of coming up with a
brand new curriculum and totally shelving the old
curriculum coming with a new one with a new
schedule, of getting some of the departments to
give up hours, which is never easy, and the
students were already taking no less than 19 and up
to 21 hours a semester. So it was a terrifically
heavy load for them anyway. So those were the two
big areas of responsibility and the two big areas
of challenge. How did that new curriculum, how did
it come about? Well, that was interesting because
clearly I knew that in the dean's role that I had to
take a lead and that it was going to take some tough,
hard decision making to bring people to an
agreement. I knew that no one or not everyone would
be happy. There's no way to ever do that. And no one
ever wants to give up hours. They simply want to
pack more material into it. So I laid down the
guidelines and I went to Dean Shelton and I told
him, I said, you've got to give me the authority and
really the leverage to be able to force some
decisions. And I'm going to get these people in a
room. We're going to set the guidelines, the
rules, and start from a clean slate and build it
from the bottom up. And I told him it would take a lot
of long, hard hours and long, long meetings. And I
purposely began to meet in the evening on a few of
them. So about 1130 at night, you begin to get a lot
more consensus and agreement. And when we
finished, there was a real sense of
accomplishment, an ownership, an excitement
about having something new. We were fortunate in
that we had seen a lot of the new curriculums around
the country. I came from the University of
Tennessee where we put a brand new curriculum in
from scratch. And quite frankly, I used that
experience of starting from ground zero,
throwing the old out. We didn't have an old there,
but throwing the old out here and starting from
scratch. And it was an exciting time for us,
really. As you look back now, who deserves credit
for being very positive in helping bring those
changes about? Well, I think clearly Dean Shelton
had a role in it because he had communicated to all
the department heads that we had to do that. And
they had to be a part of it. They had to support the
entire college over an individual interest. We
have great cooperation among the department
heads, too. And I went to them in the dean's
meetings and told them that I had to have their help
and they had to be a part of it. So it was a joint
effort, a real team effort that met with, I think,
excitement because it was at a time where
curricula around the nation were also changing
and our leadership knew that we wanted to be at the
forefront to do some things new and that we were
already one of the leading veterinary medical
colleges so this gave us an opportunity to even
press forward in a higher visible role were there
any other schools that had already made these
changes? Many of the schools were either in the
process of making changes or what really was
before us was that there were seven new schools
that came aboard within the last four or five years
preceding that time. So those schools came with no
old curriculum. They got to put a lot of new things
in. So that gave a real impetus for probably most
every veterinary medical college in the nation to
redo their curriculum. In terms of what was
dropped out, eliminated, or left behind, and what
was introduced, what were the major changes? The
major changes, quite honestly, reflected where
the profession was for that day and for really
where it is now in the fact that the knowledge base,
the expertise had both become so expanded over the
last 25, 30 years to the point that specialization
was a real part of the profession. And by that, I
mean all the board certifications, you know,
ophthalmology, radiology, surgery. And I came
from surgical specialty of being a diplomate of
the American College of Veterinary Surgeons. And
others would go into a more narrow field such as
biomedical research or one of the basic science
areas. So that it became very evident to us that we
had to allow for some specialization within the
curriculum itself to meet the needs and the
demands of the profession and the public that was
using the veterinary medical services. Now, did
this also reflect a shift in numbers of patients
from large animal to small animal, from rural to
urban? It did to some degree mainly because there
was a higher percentage and had been for several
years of students that would go into a small animal
practice versus the opportunities in large
animal. But what it did, it also allowed us to take
the large animal tracks and to specialize more in
equine or food animal or mixed practice and then
move over into the small animal where they could
spend additional hours in any of those areas that
they might elect or where they had a career
interest. So, yeah, very much that was reflected
in what we did. Give some examples, as you can
recall it, of how you felt it was working, those
changes. Well, the changes were confirmed by the
way the students began to register for some of the
specialty tracks.
The overall acceptance of the faculty and how that
was accepted was something that we put in place
from the beginning and that is that at the end of
every semester I would have an evaluation of that
semester at the end of every year that was
completed for those students we'd have an
evaluation among our students among our faculty
separately of how we felt it was going and we had
made a pact or an agreement in advance that if we
found that we had problems that we would go back and
make adjustments. And I promised the faculty that
and the department heads on the front end. We also
did one other thing that I have always felt was a
very positive step and that is that we would look at
state board results. We would look at doing a
survey one year, two years post-graduate to see if
the students themselves saw an area of deficit or
they had an area where they felt like they weren't
prepared as they needed to be. So we tried to put a
feedback and accountability system in place and I
told the faculty that new curriculum would not be
in concrete. It would still be in process and still
be mixing until we determined that we were
accomplishing what we set out to do. Can you give
some examples of events, incidents, comments
that demonstrated the differing opinions of
people who liked the changes and those who didn't?
Well, most of the comments that we might get of
people who didn't like the changes versus those
who did came from those who probably had to give up
hours and they were not getting to maybe share some
of their personal interest as much as they would
like. A faculty member? Faculty members. We had no
real
problem with any of the student feedback because I
think they felt generally that they were well
prepared. One of the areas that has always been a
criticism of most medical colleges has been that
students did not know the public, the business
side of it. So we put an internship in, a short-term
internship in, so that they would have actual
experience on site out in the profession. They get
a lot of that in a veterinary teaching hospital for
a full year. That's not just a two semester, that is
a full year of training. And it is different though
in a private practice or another type of specialty
practice than what is at a teaching hospital such
as the one at Texas A&M. So we tried to bring that
into it. So we tried to correct all those things and
the students accepted it readily. Now, at this
point, to get into the College of Veterinary
Medicine as a student, the old two-year pre-vet
program had become four. That was history. That
had become four. Every student that wanted to get
into the College of Veterinary Medicine entered
most often having already completed at least a
baccalaureate and many times even a master's
degree. Now some of the real bright students might
be in their fourth year of their baccalaureate
degree and they would gain admission provided
they finish the baccalaureate degree. And then
the old trimester program had become four years.
Had become four years. We had moved from the three
year, three trimester year to the four-year
curriculum. As you look back now on those two
changes, what were the pluses and if any minuses?
Well, the biggest plus was the removal of so much
year-round burnout. I always told students that
it is not as much the complexity of the content as it
is the overwhelming pace and volume. And when you
go year round with very short breaks between a
term, that is a tough, tough time. The other thing
that I saw was that it was probably easier on the
faculty too because they had a summer to devote
them to their other research activities and to go
back and refresh and to redo a lot of curriculum
material. When you're working year round with no
breaks, the time factor for student and faculty
really became an issue. Compare the student body
of the College of Veterinary Medicine at that
point with the student body when you were a member
of it. Well, that's an interesting comparison.
Because as stated earlier, the first girl that
ever went to veterinary college was in my class. So
there was one girl and 63 men. And when I left the
veterinary college in 1989, the student body was
about 50, 55% women and 45, 50% men. So that was a
dramatic change. The other major change I saw was
related to the work ethic and the difference in
having the kind of study skills that I saw back
earlier. And that simply is reflective of the
society, the affluence, where so many young men
and women never had to work manually even, as hard
as they did back in the earlier times. So most of the
time when a student had trouble, it was because of
the fact that they never had to work that hard, it
was new to them, or they had not yet developed the
kind of hard-working study skills that were
absolutely required to just keep up with the pace,
the volume of material that was going to be
covered. Were the students also different in
their geographic and economic backgrounds?
Probably we had more from the urban areas starting
in the probably even late 70s, mid to late 70s, and I
think that trend is still there. But there was
still a great representation geographically
from the entire state and a lot of rural areas too.
Describe the admissions process at that time. The
admissions process had not changed to a high
degree. with the exception that an aptitude test
had been put in place. So the students' actual
performance, their overall GPA, their GPA in the
sciences, their GPA in the last 45 semester credit
hours were all taken into account as a very
important predictor of whether or not they could
handle the professional curriculum. The
aptitude test was also very important. because a
student that might not have applied themselves
early but yet had tremendous intellect, that
would help give them a little boost because we knew
they could handle it. But their own record was
critically important. At that time though, every
student had to have an interview because it was
very important that the selection admissions
committee knew that that student had a
motivation, they had checked out what the
profession was, they knew what they were going to
get into, and they could demonstrate that they had
the personal skills to really be a professional.
And there were people probably with
significantly high grades that may not have got in
because their personality profile, just their
characteristics did not fit what was going to be
required of them. Do you remember in general what
kind of a GPA? The average GPA from top to bottom was
always around a 3.4 and that means we had some with a
4.0 and a few down into the 3.2, 3.1. The reason that
it was a spread like that was the fact that some of
the students who had gotten off to a bad start but
yet had done very well in the last 45 semester
credit hours, which was singled out in the higher
level courses, would be given a little bit of a
favorable
evaluation because they were handling those
harder courses at a better level. They didn't come
in high and go low. They came in and then kept
increasing in their GPA. Can you share any
examples of attempted outside interference to
gain admission? We had letters from every kind of
political office that probably would be in the
state and even national to give favorable
treatment to certain students, but those were
given no more weight. than any letters of
reference that the students were asked to have
submitted on their behalf. The students'
academic performance and background and their
own personal record constituted what the main
selection was based on. This is an editorial note
to the typist. One time in the early 70s, probably
74, maybe 75, as dean of faculties, I was in
President Williams' office, phone rang, and it
was Oscar Wyatt, prominent Houstonian, calling
in regard to the admission of a young man I believe
was related to his secretary. And as I recall, he
apparently had promised her that he would see to it
that this young man was admitted. And this had not
happened. Mr. Wyatt was calling Dr. Williams to
tell him to take care of it. Dr. Williams had the
material on his desk because he'd been expecting a
call, and the student's record wasn't even
marginal. It was pitifully
poor. And he told Mr. Wyatt that he could not, in
fairness to everyone else, set someone else aside
and put that person in there. I remember Mr. Wyatt
getting louder and stronger in his voice. And then
he started cussing Dr. Williams. and he ended up by
saying i'm going to get you fired and then he used
some real strong three and four letter word
language and dr williams at first was frowning and
then he started smiling as he hung up the phone
uh... that for me was an example of some of the
problems that administrators have to face when
there are selective processes for admission
In comparing those years with your earlier years,
how much more difficult was it for an applicant for
admission to the College of Veterinary Medicine
in your administrative years? Actually, the
admission was probably no more difficult because
we were now taking 128 students and still had
anywhere from four to 550 sometimes 600
applicants. To contrast that, when I got in, 64
students and over 600 applicants. And that really
is what precipitated the increase in the
professional school enrollment, that the need
was there and there were so many young men and women
in Texas that wanted to go to veterinary college.
Do you have any recollection as to what year that
jump in the admission number occurred? It
occurred probably in the early 60s. Early 60s. We
had 600 that year. But no, I'm talking about the
number to be admitted. Yes, because my class was
the last class of 64. The following year they went
to 97 and then they went to 128. At one time they had
gotten up to 138 and then dropped it back and it
stabilized at 128 for I presume now at least the
last 20 years. And during the years that you were
close to the admissions process, about what
percentage of the students admitted to Vet
Medicine had been undergraduates at A&M?
Probably at least 50% of them had done at least part
of their work here. A good many had done all of it,
but most of them knew that ultimately, since this
was the only veterinary college in the state of
Texas, They wanted to get here. What other schools
were important sources for applicants? That was
pretty well distributed throughout the state.
You'd be surprised at the number from the
University of Texas, Texas Tech, San Houston
State, Southwest Texas, and San Marcos. We had a
number from Rice. And it was pretty well
distributed across the state. Were we still in the
contract with? No, we had no contract with any
other. And we at that time only took 128 Texas
residents. Whereas now, I believe that the
Veterinary College is taking 10 at large students
from anywhere in the U.S. Am I correct in recalling
that on occasion students from other states would
move here, not go to college for a year, become a
legal resident, and then apply? That's exactly
right. In fact, the residency issue became very
real in that they could not come to the state of
Texas, be a student, and work part-time and become
a Texas resident. And it was clear to us when we'd
look at the backgrounds of some of the students
that they moved to the state and maybe worked a year
or two, not enrolled in any college work at all in
order to establish residency, then continue to
take coursework and apply as a Texas resident. And
the reason for that was that this was such a great
veterinary college, but also that tuition was so
much less than most all of the other states. That is
no longer and was no longer the case about the time I
left the College of Veterinary Medicine. The
tuition had begun to go up substantially. Right,
now you're in this role as Associate Dean for how
long? I was in that role from 1982 through 1988. And
how did your task change? Before I tell you how that
changed, I would like to tell you there were a
couple of things that we did other than just the
academics that I thought were very important to
the future of the college. One was that I went in to
Dean Shelton and I told him, I said, George, this is
not a formula kind of program. Long term for the
health and the advancement of this College of
Inherent Medicine. We have to look at what we can do
to get the funding to change that item similar to
what is being done for the medical and dental
schools in the state. He said, I agree with you.
I've had discussions with the higher
administration. We've had so much turnover there
that about the time I get someone up to speed on it,
they have gone. And he said, will you help me and
let's go. And I said, well, let's go. Let's put it
together. Let's put the package together. Let's
go to the university administration, show them
the benefit that it would have to them by taking us
and putting us a line item separately funded like
the medical and dental schools. And I said, one
other thing that I think is very important that we
do, and that is that we designate this entire
complex as the Texas Veterinary Medical Center to
give it the same public awareness as the Texas
Medical Center in Houston, for instance. Because
I told him, I said, we're the only one in the state.
In all the complicated cases, they all come here.
And we are that. So let's project our true identity
so that we can get our funding on base, which will
allow us to develop our research programs and it
will allow us to develop all the clinical
specialties that we're going to need if we're
going to be in a top five veterinary college. So
right after I had finished all of that, I had been
offered the deanship at two other universities,
but my heart was here at A&M and I wanted to see that
veterinary college become the very best And I had
been interviewed for a couple of upper
administrative positions at A&M. I had even been
recommended by a selection committee and was not
picked by the upper level administrator at the
time. But Bill Mobley was executive
vice chancellor right under Perry Atkinson and
was named president of Texas A&M. And I wrote Bill a
letter indicating to him my background, my
administrative background, and my interest. And
just sent my resume to him and said that if you have a
position in your office or your administration
where I could be a fit and make a difference, please
keep me in mind. And this was when he was first
putting together his team. And a few weeks went by
and I get a call from him. And I really did not know
him except to see him. And I go over and talk to him
and he gives me some idea about a position that
would be chief of staff and executive assistant to
the president. And it would also involve handling
state affairs. Well, I had had a long-term
interest in politics and legislative issues and
had gone through the process of dealing with a
couple of legislative sessions when we moved the
veterinary college to a line item in the Texas
Veterinary Medical Center. So he then got back to
me shortly afterwards, and on January 1, 1989, I
moved to the president's office. to become chief
of staff and executive assistant to the president
and handling just the chief of staff
responsibilities in that office and a lot of the
external liaison to the different constituents
as well as state affairs. Compare what you
understood to be your assignment to what it turned
out to be. Well, it was like most other
responsibilities and jobs that I have had. You
take it with a written job description, but
there's always one last job responsibility
written on there which says, and all other
assigned responsibilities. And that became a
huge expanded part of that position because he was
a visionary. and had so many programs that he
wanted to put into the university to implement.
And I usually got the assignment of doing, I guess,
kind of the strategic planning of meeting with
people across campus, of pulling those programs
together, of putting them into a sellable kind of
proposal that would be a part of the whole
university family. and they could see the benefit
in moving us toward where we wanted to go. Our heart
and our goal was for A&M to be a top 10 university,
period. And we were trying to visualize what it
would take for us to become